.TH READSEEK 1 "2026-07-19" "readseek 0.7.6" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
readseek \- structural source and PDF reader with stable line hashing
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBreadseek\fR [\fB\-h\fR|\fB--help\fR]
\fBreadseek\fR [\fB\-V\fR|\fB--version\fR]
\fBreadseek\fR [\fB--output\fR \fIpath\fR] [\fB--readseek-dir\fR \fIdir\fR] \fIcommand\fR ...

\fBreadseek detect\fR
    \fItarget\fR

\fBreadseek read\fR [\fB--language\fR \fIlanguage\fR]
    [\fB--end\fR \fIline\fR|\fB--limit\fR \fIn\fR] \fItarget\fR
\fBreadseek read\fR [\fB--image\fR \fBnone|all|caption|objects|ocr\fR]
    [\fB--vision-profile\fR \fBfast|balanced|accurate\fR] [\fB--vision-diagnostics\fR]
    [\fB--vision-benchmark\fR \fIiterations\fR] [\fB--page\fR \fIpage\fR] \fItarget\fR

\fBreadseek view\fR [\fB--format\fR \fBplain|json\fR] [\fB--node\fR \fIid\fR]
    [\fB--page\fR \fIpage\fR] [\fB--kind\fR \fIkind\fR] [\fB--depth\fR \fIn\fR]
    [\fB--outline\fR] \fItarget\fR

\fBreadseek map\fR [\fB--language\fR \fIlanguage\fR]
    \fItarget\fR

\fBreadseek check\fR [\fB--language\fR \fIlanguage\fR]
    \fItarget\fR

\fBreadseek symbol\fR [\fB--language\fR \fIlanguage\fR]
    \fItarget\fR [\fB--name\fR]

\fBreadseek identify\fR [\fB--language\fR \fIlanguage\fR]
    [\fB--column\fR \fIcolumn\fR]
    \fItarget\fR

\fBreadseek def\fR [\fB--format\fR \fIformat\fR] [\fB\-c\fR|\fB--cached\fR] [\fB\-o\fR|\fB--others\fR]
    [\fB\-i\fR|\fB--ignored\fR] [\fB--language\fR \fIlanguage\fR]
    \fItarget\fR \fIname\fR

\fBreadseek refs\fR [\fB--format\fR \fIformat\fR] [\fB--scope\fR \fB--line\fR \fIline\fR [\fB--column\fR \fIcolumn\fR]]
    [\fB\-c\fR|\fB--cached\fR] [\fB\-o\fR|\fB--others\fR]
    [\fB\-i\fR|\fB--ignored\fR] [\fB--language\fR \fIlanguage\fR]
    \fItarget\fR \fIname\fR

\fBreadseek rename\fR \fB--line\fR \fIline\fR [\fB--column\fR \fIcolumn\fR] \fB--to\fR \fIname\fR
    [\fB--workspace\fR \fIdir\fR] [\fB\-c\fR|\fB--cached\fR] [\fB\-o\fR|\fB--others\fR]
    [\fB\-i\fR|\fB--ignored\fR] [\fB--apply\fR] [\fB--plan-hash\fR \fIhash\fR]
    [\fB--language\fR \fIlanguage\fR] \fItarget\fR

\fBreadseek search\fR [\fB\-c\fR|\fB--cached\fR] [\fB\-o\fR|\fB--others\fR]
    [\fB\-i\fR|\fB--ignored\fR] [\fB--language\fR \fIlanguage\fR]
    \fItarget\fR \fIpattern\fR

\fBreadseek init\fR [\fIpath\fR]
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B readseek
is a command-line tool whose source-processing commands output compact JSON.
It is designed for scripts, editors, and coding agents that need stable, addressable
source context.

Commands that return source lines represent them as hashline records containing a
line number, a short 3-character hash, and the original text. Unchanged lines
retain the same hash.

Operational errors are written to standard error, making JSON output safe to pipe
into other programs.

.SH INPUTS AND TARGETS

Most commands take a file or directory \fItarget\fR on the command line.
The \fBdetect\fR, \fBread\fR, \fBmap\fR, \fBcheck\fR, \fBsymbol\fR, and \fBidentify\fR
commands can read from standard input by prefixing the target with \fBstdin:\fR.
The remainder after the prefix is an optional detection path. For \fBread\fR,
\fBsymbol\fR, and \fBidentify\fR it may carry a line or hash address, e.g.
\fBstdin:scratch.rs:42\fR reads stdin, detects the language from the \fI.rs\fR
extension, and targets line 42. If the path is omitted (\fBstdin::42\fR) language
detection falls back to content and shebang analysis.
A target path may carry a suffix that selects a specific line:
.nf
.RS
\fIfile\fR:\fIline\fR
\fIfile\fR:\fIhash\fR
.RE
.fi
Line numbers are one-based. A hash suffix is a 3-character string that was
previously emitted by \fBread\fR, \fBmap\fR, or \fBsearch\fR output.

For \fBsymbol\fR, the \fB--name\fR flag treats the target suffix as a
qualified or unqualified symbol name. If the name matches more than one symbol,
the command reports an error.
.SH LANGUAGES

.B readseek
 detects the language from the file name, extension, shebang line, and syntax hints.
Commands that parse source accept \fB--language\fR to force a specific language.

The following language identifiers are accepted:
\fBassembly\fR,
\fBbash\fR,
\fBc\fR,
\fBcpp\fR,
\fBcsharp\fR,
\fBcss\fR,
\fBdockerfile\fR,
\fBgdscript\fR,
\fBgo\fR,
\fBhtml\fR,
\fBjava\fR,
\fBjavascript\fR,
\fBjson\fR,
\fBjsx\fR,
\fBjust\fR,
\fBkconfig\fR,
\fBlatex\fR,
\fBlua\fR,
\fBmake\fR,
\fBmarkdown\fR,
\fBmeson\fR,
\fBnix\fR,
\fBperl\fR,
\fBphp\fR,
\fBpuppet\fR,
\fBpython\fR,
\fBriscv\fR,
\fBruby\fR,
\fBrust\fR,
\fBsql\fR,
\fBswift\fR,
\fBtoml\fR,
\fBtsx\fR,
\fBtypescript\fR,
\fBtypst\fR,
\fBxml\fR,
\fByaml\fR,
\fBvimscript\fR, and
\fBzig\fR.
The special value \fBunknown\fR treats the input as plain text and disables any
parser-based features.

.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B detect
Print detection metadata as JSON. \fBtype\fR is the detected MIME type, or
\fBtext/plain\fR when unknown. Source files include language and parser metadata;
images include format, dimensions, and animation status; PDFs include page count.
.TP
.B read
Print line numbers, hashes, and text for a range of lines. Without any range
options the entire file is returned. Use a line or hash suffix on the target
path to set the first line.
Use \fB--end\fR for the last line (inclusive) or \fB--limit\fR for a count;
the two cannot be combined.
Visual files use a separate result shape. Images return bounded base64 by default;
\fB--image none|all|caption|objects|ocr\fR selects bounded base64, all analyses,
or one Qwen3-VL analysis mode. PDFs return page-tagged Markdown plus
page-associated embedded images with the same mode. The \fIfast\fR vision profile
reduces visual tokens, \fIbalanced\fR is the default, and \fIaccurate\fR retains
more visual detail for dense OCR and small objects. Vision options cannot be combined
with \fB--end\fR, \fB--limit\fR, or \fB--language\fR, and line or hash suffixes do
not apply to visual files. The model runs through llama.cpp and downloads lazily
(see \fBCACHE\fR).
.TP
.B view
Create or reuse a persistent structural index for a PDF and print a bounded view.
A \fI.readseek/\fR directory must already be available; run \fBinit\fR first or
pass \fB--readseek-dir\fR. With no selector, the command prints a document
overview. Narrow the result with \fB--page\fR, \fB--node\fR, \fB--kind\fR,
\fB--depth\fR, or \fB--outline\fR. Plain output is the default; use
\fB--format json\fR for the structured representation. Indexed embedded images
are stored with the document cache.
.TP
.B map
Print the structural source map: each extracted symbol's kind, name, qualified
name, start and end line, boundary hashes, the symbol's \fIstart_byte\fR and
\fIend_byte\fR span, and the \fIname_byte\fR offset of its name token. For languages
that do not support symbol extraction the output contains an empty symbol list.
.TP
.B check
Print parse diagnostics: the counts of tree-sitter \fIERROR\fR and \fIMISSING\fR
nodes and a list of each diagnostic's kind and start and end line. For languages
without a tree-sitter parser the output contains zero counts and an empty list.
.TP
.B symbol
Print the source range for one symbol. With \fB--name\fR, the target suffix is
treated as a qualified or unqualified symbol name. Without \fB--name\fR, a line
or hash suffix selects the symbol containing that location.
.TP
.B identify
Print the requested cursor line, its hash, the identifier at the cursor position,
and the enclosing mapped symbol. If \fB--column\fR is omitted, column 1 is used.
Columns are one-based byte offsets and must be within the selected line. The
identifier token is resolved with the language parser when available, falling
back to an ASCII identifier scan otherwise. Identifier ranges in the JSON use a
one-based inclusive start column and a one-based exclusive end column, plus
\fIstart_byte\fR and \fIend_byte\fR file offsets that mark the exact token span.
.TP
.B def
Find definitions of a mapped symbol in a file or directory. The \fIname\fR argument
matches a fully qualified or unqualified symbol name. Directory search follows
the same file-selection rules as \fBsearch\fR.
Use \fB--format plain\fR to emit quickfix-friendly location entries instead of full
definition objects.
.TP
.B refs
Find all occurrences of an identifier in a file or directory. Output is a flat
list of locations with file, line, column, line hash, line text, and the enclosing
symbol when available. Directory search rules are the same as for \fBsearch\fR.
Use \fB--format plain\fR to flatten symbol metadata into each location entry.

With \fB--scope\fR and \fB--line\fR/\fB--column\fR, resolution is restricted to the
lexical binding under the cursor within a single file. Each reported location then
carries an \fIoccurrence\fR field of \fBdefinition\fR or \fBreference\fR, and
same-named occurrences that resolve to a different binding are excluded. Scope
resolution is available for \fBrust\fR, \fBc\fR, \fBcpp\fR, \fBpython\fR, \fBgo\fR,
\fBjava\fR, \fBjavascript\fR, \fBjsx\fR, \fBtypescript\fR, \fBtsx\fR, \fBcsharp\fR,
\fBswift\fR, and \fBvimscript\fR; other languages report no resolvable binding.
.TP
.B rename
Plan a binding-accurate rename of the lexical binding under \fB--line\fR/\fB--column\fR
within a single file. The output is an edit plan: \fIold_name\fR, \fInew_name\fR,
any \fIconflicts\fR the new name would introduce, and an \fIedits\fR array with the
line, column range, byte range, occurrence kind, line hash, and text for each
edit. Without \fB--apply\fR the command does not modify files; it emits the plan for
a caller to apply. With \fB--apply\fR the edits are written to the file, but only
after refusing on any conflict and re-verifying that every edited line's hash still
matches the plan, so a file that changed since planning is rejected rather than
corrupted. The reported \fIapplied\fR field indicates whether the file was written.
Rename uses the same scope resolution as \fBrefs --scope\fR and is available for the
same languages.
.IP
With \fB--workspace\fR the rename expands across the given directory or repository.
The cursor file stays binding-accurate; every other file is matched by name, the
same way \fBrefs\fR matches, and the additional files appear in an \fIothers\fR array
of per-file plans. Because readseek has no cross-file symbol resolver, an occurrence
in another file is renamed only when it does not resolve to a local declaration
there, so a same-named local binding is left untouched; files in languages without
binding support are matched by name alone. Directory selection honors the same
\fB\-c\fR/\fB\-o\fR/\fB\-i\fR Git flags as \fBrefs\fR. With \fB--apply\fR every file is
verified before writing begins. If a write fails, readseek attempts to restore
files already written.
.TP
.B search
Run an AST pattern against a file or every supported source file under a directory.
Files that cannot be parsed or are in unsupported languages are skipped.
Pattern variables use \fB$\fR\fINAME\fR to match a single node and
\fB$$$\fR\fINAME\fR to match zero or more sibling nodes.
Output is grouped by file and includes the file hash, matched ranges, captures,
boundary hashes, and hashlines for each match.
.TP
.B init
Initialize a \fI.readseek/\fR directory under \fIpath\fR (defaults to the current
directory) and populate its map cache and definition index. If the directory
already exists, \fBinit\fR refreshes the caches.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB--help\fR
Print usage information and exit.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB--version\fR
Print the program version and exit.
.TP
\fB--output\fR \fIpath\fR
Write command output to \fIpath\fR instead of standard output. It cannot be used
with \fB--version\fR or \fBinit\fR.
.TP
\fB--readseek-dir\fR \fIdir\fR
Use \fIdir\fR as the \fI.readseek/\fR directory instead of discovering one by
walking up from the target, analogous to \fBgit\fR's \fB--git-dir\fR. This global
option must precede the command. For \fBinit\fR it controls where the directory is
created; map-dependent commands update entries for files they process.
.TP
\fB--language\fR \fIlanguage\fR
Force a specific language instead of auto-detection. See \fBLANGUAGES\fR above.
.TP
\fB--image\fR \fImode\fR
For \fBread\fR on images or PDFs: \fInone\fR (default, bounded base64), \fIall\fR,
\fIcaption\fR, \fIobjects\fR, or \fIocr\fR. See \fBread\fR under \fBCOMMANDS\fR.
.TP
\fB--vision-profile\fR \fIprofile\fR
For analyzed images or PDFs, select \fIfast\fR, \fIbalanced\fR (default), or
\fIaccurate\fR. Fast reduces visual-token work; accurate retains more detail.
.TP
\fB--vision-diagnostics\fR
Emit cache status, backend devices, token counts, per-stage timings, throughput, and
peak resident memory as one JSON object on standard error. Cached results may omit
inference fields because no model inference ran.
.TP
\fB--vision-benchmark\fR \fIiterations\fR
For an analyzed image file, run one unmeasured warmup followed by the positive number
of measured iterations. Emit a JSON benchmark report on standard error. PDF
benchmarking is not supported.
.TP
\fB--page\fR \fIpage\fR
For \fBread\fR, select a one-based PDF page. For \fBview\fR, restrict the
structural view to a one-based source page.
.TP
\fB--format\fR \fIformat\fR
For \fBdef\fR and \fBrefs\fR, select \fIjson\fR (default) or \fIplain\fR.
For \fBview\fR, select \fIplain\fR (default) or \fIjson\fR.
.TP
\fB--line\fR \fIline\fR
Cursor line for \fBrefs --scope\fR and \fBrename\fR.
.TP
\fB--column\fR \fIcolumn\fR
One-based byte column for \fBidentify\fR or the cursor column for \fBrefs --scope\fR
and \fBrename\fR.
Identifier ranges in JSON use a one-based inclusive start column and a one-based
exclusive end column.
.TP
\fB--scope\fR
For \fBrefs\fR, resolve only the lexical binding under \fB--line\fR/\fB--column\fR
in a single file instead of matching every occurrence of the name.
.TP
\fB--to\fR \fIname\fR
For \fBrename\fR, the new name for the binding. Must be a plain identifier and
differ from the current name.
.TP
\fB--workspace\fR \fIdir\fR
For \fBrename\fR, expand the rename across \fIdir\fR. See \fBrename\fR under
\fBCOMMANDS\fR for cross-file matching and Git file selection.
.TP
\fB--apply\fR
For \fBrename\fR, write the planned edits after checking conflicts and verifying
each affected file and line hash.
.TP
\fB--plan-hash\fR \fIhash\fR
For \fBrename --apply\fR, require the apply plan to match the hash emitted by an
earlier dry-run plan.
.TP
\fB--end\fR \fIline\fR
Last line to include when reading. Cannot be combined with \fB--limit\fR.
.TP
\fB--limit\fR \fIn\fR
Maximum number of lines to include when reading. Cannot be combined with \fB--end\fR.
.TP
\fB--node\fR \fIid\fR
For \fBview\fR, use the indexed node ID as the view root.
.TP
\fB--kind\fR \fIkind\fR
For \fBview\fR, include only nodes of the selected kind: \fIartifact\fR,
\fIfooter\fR, \fIheader\fR, \fIheading\fR, \fImarginal_label\fR, \fIpage\fR,
\fIpage_number\fR, \fIparagraph\fR, \fIsection\fR, or
\fIstructural_section\fR.
.TP
\fB--depth\fR \fIn\fR
For \fBview\fR, limit output to this depth below the selected roots.
.TP
\fB--outline\fR
For \fBview\fR, return outline nodes only.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB--cached\fR
When searching a directory inside a Git repository, or expanding \fBrename
--workspace\fR, search tracked and indexed files.
.TP
\fB\-o\fR, \fB--others\fR
When searching a directory inside a Git repository, or expanding \fBrename
--workspace\fR, search untracked files that are not ignored.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB--ignored\fR
With \fB--others\fR, also include ignored untracked files. Inside a Git repository
\fB--ignored\fR requires \fB--others\fR.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B READSEEK_VISION_THREADS
Positive llama.cpp inference thread count. The default is the available logical CPU
count.
.TP
.B READSEEK_VISION_BATCH
Positive logical prompt batch size. The default is 2048.
.TP
.B READSEEK_VISION_UBATCH
Positive physical micro-batch size. The default is 512 and it cannot exceed
\fBREADSEEK_VISION_BATCH\fR. Larger batches can improve prompt prefill while
increasing peak memory.

.SH DIRECTORY SEARCH

The \fBdef\fR, \fBrefs\fR, and \fBsearch\fR commands accept either
a single file or a directory. A file is searched as-is; a directory is searched
recursively.

Inside a Git work tree, directory searches are Git-aware. Without any selection
flags, \fBreadseek\fR searches both tracked/indexed files and untracked,
non-ignored files. Pass \fB--cached\fR or \fB--others\fR to restrict to one group.
Outside a Git work tree the selection flags are ignored and a normal recursive
walk is used.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Operational error: file not found, binary input, malformed input, cache failure,
or symbol lookup failure.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error: incorrect invocation or argument combination.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I .readseek/maps/
Binary source-map cache files keyed by file hash.
.TP
.I .readseek/def-index/
Sharded binary definition index keyed by symbol name, used by \fBdef\fR directory lookup.
.TP
.I .readseek/documents/
Persistent PDF structural indexes and extracted embedded-image assets, keyed by
PDF content hash.
.TP
.I .readseek/vision/
Content-addressed, profile-specific cache of image caption, object-detection, and OCR results.
.TP
.I user cache directory/readseek/models/
The Qwen3-VL quantized GGUF model and Q8_0 multimodal projector, downloaded lazily
and checksum-verified on first use of \fBread --image all|caption|objects|ocr\fR.

.SH EXAMPLES

Detect the language of a file:
.EX
readseek detect src/main.rs
.EE

Read lines 10 through 20:
.EX
readseek read src/main.rs:10 --end 20
.EE

Read 12 lines starting from line 42:
.EX
readseek read src/main.rs:42 --limit 12
.EE

Read unsaved buffer text from standard input:
.EX
printf '%s\en' 'fn main() {}' | readseek read stdin:scratch.rs
.EE

Build a structural map of a file:
.EX
readseek map src/main.rs
.EE

View the structure of an indexed PDF page:
.EX
readseek view report.pdf --page 3
.EE

Look up a symbol by name or by the line it's on:
.EX
readseek symbol src/main.rs:run --name
readseek symbol src/main.rs:270
.EE

Identify what's under the cursor at line 42, column 8:
.EX
readseek identify src/main.rs:42 --column 8
.EE

Find definitions of a symbol in tracked files:
.EX
readseek def -c src run --language rust
.EE

Find references to a symbol in tracked files:
.EX
readseek refs -c src main --language rust
.EE

Search Rust functions with an AST pattern:
.EX
readseek search -c src 'fn $NAME() { $$$BODY }' --language rust
.EE

Plan a rename of the binding under the cursor:
.EX
readseek rename src/main.rs --line 42 --column 8 --to renamed
.EE

Apply the rename to the file:
.EX
readseek rename src/main.rs --line 42 --column 8 --to renamed --apply
.EE

Rename a symbol across the repository after verifying every affected file:
.EX
readseek rename src/main.rs --line 42 --column 8 --to renamed --workspace . --apply
.EE

Benchmark five warm inference iterations and save the normal result separately:
.EX
readseek read fixture.png --image all --vision-benchmark 5 >result.json 2>benchmark.json
.EE

Run low-latency captioning with four inference threads:
.EX
READSEEK_VISION_THREADS=4 readseek read photo.jpg --image caption --vision-profile fast
.EE

.SH BUILDING

Build from source:
.EX
cargo build --release
.EE
The included Makefile also provides install and uninstall targets.
CPU builds can enable llama.cpp OpenMP support with \fB--features openmp\fR. GPU
builds can enable \fBmetal\fR, \fBopencl\fR, \fBrocm\fR, or \fBvulkan\fR.

.SH LICENSE

The \fBreadseek\fR native program is licensed under \fBLGPL-2.1-or-later\fR.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cargo (1)
